I'll lead us into a question.
On the eve of the 24th century and the relevance of poetry, if we just kind of enter a conversation, are that... Sure.
The astonishing thing to me is the enormous growth in numbers in poetry in this country.
You realize when I was in college, a pretty well-known poet, as far as poets were well-known,
would be published in an initial edition of 1,000 copies, possibly 750.
And if it's sold out in two or three years, a hundred times the publisher is reprinted mostly now.
And an initial printing now is going to be a minimum of 4,000, really.
And Jane Kenyon's otherwise, my late wife's book, was published in April.
I'm sorry, I should have mentioned that.
Published in April out of St.
Paul, Minnesota.
Grey Wolf Press in an edition of 7,500 copies, which sold out in a month.
They reordered 6,000.
3,000 are on order.
That is 10,500 gone.
Two months after publication.
And I think it's going to go 2025 in the first year.
Wow.
I know a dozen.
Where is it selling, basically?
Do you know?
I don't really know.
I don't...
People have been writing me that it's out of stock in Seattle, a lot of stock in Portland.
And I went out to San Francisco, where they had five copies before I had only one.
I had only one.
And they went in about 30 seconds.
It's such an amazing thing.
But, you know, fresh air did an hour.
And the fact of her relatively early death is really part of it.
That's the story.
The story of that, you know.
And there had been an hour-long program of Bill Moyers, about the two of us, which brought her to people's attention the more she'd published five books.
And they, you know, and they were reprinting and selling more than 10,000.
You know, there are dozens of poets in this country who will routinely sell more than 10,000 copies of their books.
That's news.
Newspapers don't know it.
I keep reading the same story about how nobody reads poetry anymore.
That's not true.
I did an interview with Moyers last summer when he did the book on poetry.
In fact, prior to this interview, I read this segment again on you, which is some good stuff in there.
You know, that whole thing that he did, poetry is exploding all over the United States.
The poetry reading is the link, but that doesn't tell you why there's a poetry.
Yeah.
I mean, when I was in college again, I was in my reunion,
Harvard had an end out front for poetry readings.
But there were very few colleges or institutions that had poetry readings.
Poetry readings were a rare, rare event.
If you look through the biography of Ball Stevens or William Collins Williams, they read their poems once a year, once every two years.
And now there are many of us who could easily read a hundred times a year.
The drama does crazy.
But there are many, many people who will read, say, 40 times a year, 30 times a year.
And you get paid for it.
I was going to say, it's possible for a poet now to make a living from that.
Pretty much, yeah.
Yeah, it depends on what you call a living.
And my freelancing for 21 years now has been supported by children's books and essays and magazine writing, my journalism, interviewing people, like Bob Hoosie and Worcester.
But a great leap, maybe 25%, by the poetry reading itself.
And then less we saw by the, uh, less by the royalties from books and magazines and parable.
Well, they're a hundred dollars.
Well, I don't make any money in the syndicate.
No.
But it does get me in three million papers every year.
Yeah, yeah.
And that helps my book.
My book is 60, you went into a fifth reading, 60 pounds.
Oh, very good.
For a $35 book, which is not bad.
That's very good.
But I have to believe that they read me every week in these cities.
Absolutely.
And the talks have been getting them written.
All of a sudden, it's been a pretty nice source of income.
Yeah.
Good.
You know, I'd like to get one a month, actually.
Sure, sure.
But anyway, poetry has kind of exploded.
And first of all, I need to say two things back where I've said that.
That's all true.
But of course the quantity of poets, of books, of sales of books, of poetry readings, of magazines, does not mean it's good.
I think a lot is good.
I want to make it clear that when I'm talking about numbers, I'm talking about numbers.
And the other thing, that there's a change in the audience.
It is more apt to be a poetry audience, reading poetry, not a sort of general literary book reader audience.
Now, the poetry audience has increased enormously in this country.
But there are so many people who will read, who are readers.
I mean, we know a lot of people.
Most people are non-readers.
But there will be readers who read nothing but novels.
There will be readers who read nothing but science fiction.
There will be readers who read virtually nothing but poetry.
And this kind of vulcanization, I think, is negative.
There are fewer general magazines that publish poetry.
The Atlantic, Harper's, not Harper's.
Harper's publishes occasionally, but that's no sign of it.
They don't have an atmosphere.
But obviously the Atlantic, and the New Yorker, and the Nation, and the New Republic, and then where?
Whereas before there was a Saturday venue, there was Harper's, and there were other places that tended to do it.
Harvard Magazine, which was the Alumni Magazine, became a general magazine, and is now becoming an Alumni Magazine again, has dropped a regular poetry feature from it.
And I deplore this sort of separation into Balkans.
But I think poetry thrives.
Of course, it thrives.
I think my question was the relevance of poetry.
It thrives because people find it relevant, you know.
It's right.
Well, I mean, whether it's people being entertained by it.
But, I mean, you as a poet, a distinguished poet, and I guess I'm thriving at
you know, what the poet has to say, I guess it has... I feel that, I think there are more people reading it, and more people getting something from it, and one thing that they're getting from it, by and large, well, say two major things.
One is an attention, an intimate attention to language, which is a zone, which one's counter to the information culture, but people
uh overwhelmed by the information culture by numbers and figures and uh flat fat uh turns to something else which is uh has some juice to it and some something organic to it and parallel to that and somewhat similar is the quest for a test of feeling kind of litmus feeling for a litmus paper of emotion um feeling uh grief which is my major feeling in recent time uh i go to the poet's uh
Not to be consoled in the sense of being told everything is all right, but in joining or feeling together, I can't stand the word share, and I'm trying to avoid it.
Share is the most ridiculous word of the world at the moment.
Especially for an artist, too.
Yeah.
But I go to something in the 17th century.
I go to Gilgamesh, for God's sake, the oldest poem that survives.
to feel company in grief, brotherhood in grief.
And I think that for poetry by and large, either or both, and better both, enhances the reader by its attention to language and its accuracy, close use of language, and by mirroring and making possible and making artful
the extremes of freedom.
I'd like to say I read a lot of poetry.
I don't.
The nature of my work is that I read just to stay current with what I'm doing.
But I have to say also how profoundly moved I was by this book of yours, and also how I read a ton of memoirs and autobiographies.
I've learned as much about you, I think, through reading this book, and you have really
Maybe you could have, you probably could have written a 60 or 70 or 80 or 90,000 word memoir, but I wonder if I'd have learned more about you, Heather, than I would of these.
I have written a lot of memoir, and I've told some of the same stories twice, but you tell them in a different way.
Yeah, but it is interesting that you did decide to, you chose to tell this story of your own life again in this fashion.
Maybe we could talk a little bit about that.
Sure.
I didn't set out to write The Old Life Speaking now, not of the book as a whole, but of the poem.
Of the poem, yeah.
I did begin, of course, including the fourth poem as well, which is a question of a very recent book.
I did literally begin by spending years deploring the sort of current, the poem of the moment, which is not quite the same as this.
It's a short-lined pre-verse anecdote out of the life.
This is the poem of our moment, which is always to be derived.
And I spent a lot of time yelling at it, yelling about it, and so on.
And I spent so much time yelling about it that literally I had the thought, if I'm talking so much about this, it must be I want to write some of these.
And I experimentally wrote a few, not in the form that I eventually arrived at.
and discovered, yes, I didn't want to tell stories out of my life.
Okay, go ahead.
And I don't think I've, I hope I haven't written the poems that I was deriding.
No, I don't think anybody could describe.
But these are actually in a kind of arcane form that nobody's ever going to see.
But that pleased me.
Every two lines adds up to 15 syllables.
And I don't expect anybody ever to notice this.
Is there a name for that form?
It's a form of syllabics, and I invented this particular thing.
Generally, in syllabics, you've got the number of syllables per line, but I wanted to disguise it further, so I took every two lines.
So there's some sevens and eights, but there's some tens and fives.
Do you want to name it?
Syllabics.
A subspecies of syllabics.
I'll use it in the piece.
If you want to give it a name, we'll christen it.
I don't think I've got to give it a further name.
But I've written more, actually.
I had more in that same form in a book that I'm working on now that I'll probably delay for a couple of years, about Jane's illness and death.
And why 15 syllables?
No reason.
I like the shapes I can make with it.
I had written... You mean visual shapes?
Yeah, visual shapes.
I had written some poems in a long 15-syllable line before.
The poem called The Thirteenth Ending is in a thirteenth syllable line.
But there are some others.
There's a long narrative I have in fifteen.
And what I did, more or less, was to take that old fifteen syllable line and split it into two, but at any point.
Not at a particular point.
I mean, say, not always seven and eight.
Seven and eight, or anything, but...
I don't have any force.
I should have known something.
No, you shouldn't.
It's not for you.
You have read so perfectly, though, so smoothly.
Does this kind of impinge on the creative process?
No, it helps the creative process.
It forces change.
It is arbitrary, and I change one word that makes me change another one.
Part of the process of revision, I revise endlessly.
is to force yourself to think think over every single word again and again and again and this constraint constraints are liberation okay opposites are always the same constraint i'm sorry what are always the same opposites are always i don't want to label over any word on the tape that's all right yeah uh and so constraint is a constraint is a liberation and this uh syllabic uh form is one way i haven't forcing myself uh if i have the word become
in the poem, and it's perfectly fine, to think it through and think if there's something better, especially, you know, if I change a word or a little one next to it, become, I no longer need two syllables there, I need one or I need three, perhaps, and I go over it again.
Then if become is still the right word, I'll think some of the words until I get it the way I want it.
One of the presuppositions is that you can always do it if you just keep at it long enough.
But, again, you're forcing the number of syllables into the poem, in a way, aren't you?
Theoretically.
Becoming is the best word.
It's the best word.
I will do it so that it comes out the right number of syllables and I've got the best word.
Then I will.
I mean, people say they don't want to rhyme because it means they can't use the word they want.
That's amateur.
I mean, if you're going to rhyme, you get the right word and you rhyme it.
No excuses.
I love also to work things over and over and over.
This is my great pleasure.
I hate first draft.
because I can't stand how bad they are.
You hate reading them or you hate writing them?
I hate writing them, and then I hate reading them the next day.
And I start trying to make it better.
And, you know, typically I work at least two years off in four units on poems.
Well, I've read in that Moyer's interview that you spent as many as 15 and 16 and 17 years on poems.
But that's exceptional.
I'm trying to talk more average.
Since Jane died, I've done nothing but write poems about her, and I began to write her letters.
And there are seven of the letters, and the numbers of drafts at the moment from the early ones, about 120.
I don't understand.
You're writing her letters in verse, telling her what's happening, remembering things.
Oh, you're writing letters to her?
Yes.
Okay.
And some of them got 127 drafts, 104 drafts.
The earliest one, which I began two months ago, was about 27, 29 drafts, and it's getting there.
It was a draft 22 that I figured I got a form.
Do you number these?
Yeah, I number them.
Right.
I keep them all.
Do you anticipate every question?
You're making it very easy for me.
I hadn't started numbering them until fairly recently, but I do keep all the old drafts.
And I go back.
You know, when I'm stuck or when I think the thing is finished, which I think from time to time, I go back and look at old things, things I crossed out.
It's possible and occasionally I discover that on one day I crossed out a line or a word or a phrase that was really the right one.
I'm in the state.
And so I go back and I can tell where I'm at just because I've got the numbers.
Can you imagine how much of this would be lost if you were doing this on a word processor?
Well, yeah, unless you...
Pat that out in a few minutes.
I gather you don't do any of this stuff.
No, I don't.
I write longhand.
I found my appropriate technology a number of years ago that suits me.
And which is?
Which is to write longhand.
With a pen or a pencil or what?
Either.
Anything.
The power moves from all writers and magic makers.
The power moves from the number one pencil to the roll of ball to a casing to a thousand pen.
because I hold it like this a long time, and it dries up.
But then I dictate, and I have a typist for the word processor.
So that makes it a lot more convenient when I'm working on a poem, 120 drafts, and I'm changing a period to a semicolon, and a word from the end of one line to the next, and taking out one word.
Then she's going to type the whole thing up again, and I appreciate the word processor, but I don't touch it.
Thirty-five years ago, I decided I stopped typing.
My back hurt.
I hated it.
I think I was delaying some prose writing, not poetry, because I hated to type so much.
And I hired somebody to type the manuscript at that time.
And I dictate letters now, and I dictate all my prose and poetry.
And then, because my handwriting is illegible, I dictate the revisions.
Every day, I did my typist, the latest pile of revisions, and just go through and say, page two, would instead of seen, and so on.
And I get back clean copy the same day.
And the next morning, I have clean copy to work on it.
You don't notice the difference from the dictation to the actual writing of it?
Dictation is just a mechanical device to transfer it from handwriting to
I'm sorry, you've written it, and then you dictate it.
So you're not composing through dictation?
I'm not composing.
In letters, I compose through dictation.
And I have tried it.
You know, Henry James could dictate the Ambassadors, but I can't dictate a 500-word book or two.
No, I don't know.
People could, actually.
But I have occasionally... I've dictated news stories on Deadline, and that's a bitch.
That's the hardest thing in the world to do.
You have to write in your head,
And to have it be publishable within 15 minutes.
Lots of times in letters I write perfectly fine prose, but if I sat down to write what I'm going to publish, ah, I'm just going to follow.
So obviously the whole concept of completed work with you doesn't exist.
No, no.
People say, how do you know when a poem is finished?
And I tell them, well, I don't.
Because after a book comes out, I begin to make changes.
But don't you feel that, I mean, obviously then you agree with Whitman who is constantly revising and leaves the grass up until we have the deathbed edition, you know.
Do you feel that that's an appropriate thing for a poet?
I think it's mine and I can do with it what the hell I wish.
I also know that there are printed copies in libraries and if in the future anybody cares.
and they like an earlier version more than you.
But, I mean, this whole thing about certain poems reflecting certain stages of your development, uh, artistically.
Well, it would be, uh, it has been hard, uh, to go.
See, sometimes, Suzanne, a poem I wrote when I was 25.
That's kind of what I'm asking.
There's one word that just bothers me so damn much, I don't want to rethink the whole poem.
And if I can do invisible mending, um, at the age of 60,
and get a word in there, which is, you know, not a great word, but not offensive, I'll do it.
Yes, it's hard to go back that far.
But as you get older, and I don't know how much older I am, but quite a bit, you don't change so rapidly.
And I don't want to go back and... If I... I'm wanting to make enormous changes, unless you probably would be to write a...
But many times I find, despite a hundred drafts and so on, that I have goofed that I have done something stupid in there.
And I can, if I can close it out, I can make the poem better.
And that's my... How about during readings?
Do you revise on the spot?
I have every now and then, not lately.
But I also, during readings, which is publishing, which is making public, I will discover that I come up to a word and I don't want to read it, you know.
I would read it anyway, but I'll remember.
There's something wrong in there.
Will you mark it, or will you just mark it?
I'll mark it at some point.
Would you ever change it on the spot, if you thought of something wrong?
Well, I have done.
I found myself doing it, but by mistake, and once it tries purposefully, but I don't think for 20 years.
But I had noticed that, and then, of course, I'd make a note and so on.
And sometimes after a reading, I will immediately revise a poem.
There's more to have to be true with management.
When I first work on poems, I will not show them to anybody.
I didn't show them to Jane for a long time.
Jane didn't show them to me.
For me, there's a point that it varies in time, from one month to six months or so, when I don't want anybody to see it.
The poem is still changing on its own.
Every time I look at it, I don't want to fiddle with it.
And then when it gets set, I don't mean I know this is finished, this is just the way I want it, but I don't know what to do now.
Then I will show it to others.
Then I will read it aloud in the reading, perhaps.
Knowing that it's not finished, but thinking it's okay, it's not terrible, and thinking that reading it aloud, I may learn about it.
Sometimes people speak to me afterwards about a poem and tell me, read like this and didn't like that.
But it's more that simply by the act of reading aloud the faces, I'm making it public, and that changes it.
As when the poem comes in print.
You know, I'll send the poem to a magazine and it'll come out a year later.
And when the magazine arrives and I see it in print, it doesn't look like my typing.
It objectifies it.
I look at it again as if anew.
And immediately.
It is different, isn't it, in type?
Immediately what I'm making.
I mean, I know when you interview people, or I interview people, and they tell you something, and you quote them precisely.
People who've never been quoted before say, I know I said it, but it doesn't look like that's what I said.
I mean, they don't know.
And there are times they'll say, you really want to say that to somebody, because I know what it's going to be.
Feel free to say that to me.
No, I've never embarrassed anybody, really.
I've never had, I've never, I've done close to a thousand of these interviews over the last 20 years, and I've never had a problem with anybody who could.
I'm very sensitive to...
Anyway, you talked about living with grief, and obviously for a clear and understandable reason.
Tell me about this book, then, if we could talk a little bit about this book.
I began it.
I mean, much of it was originally drafted before Jane McEwen Hill.
Jane was diagnosed with leukemia in January of 1994.
Thank God.
15 months.
She had acute, she would have died in two or three weeks if she had not had chemo.
And she had lots and lots of chemo and eventually a bone marrow transplant, which was the only thing that might have served her life.
An enormous amount of suffering.
I took care of her.
I was by her side all the time.
I was by her side in the hospital.
I got a motel room nearby, or out in Seattle.
little apartment houses for the caregivers of the bone marrow transplant.
She was in the hospital.
I'd be with her from 6 in the morning until 7 or 8 at night.
And when she was at our house or in the Seattle apartment, of course, I was just there 24 hours.
I learned how to program pumps to infuse drugs and nutrition for her.
I'm technophobic, and I never thought I could learn how to program a pump.
and, you know, assemble all the tubing and get it into her.
They dangle a heart catheter outside her, so you don't have to go on your skin all the time.
I was rewriting this book and writing further poems all the time, she'd say.
And I wrote a couple of stories.
I just finished proofreading a story that's coming in Atlantic that I wrote entirely what she'd say.
And she loved it, that when I was an actualian,
you know, giving her pills and infusing, and I was under.
And, of course, in the hospital, other people were doing that, so I just sat and wrote all the time, not all the time.
I wrote, rewrote these poems over and over again, and wrote further poems about her illness, which will be in my next book.
And I would, when she felt well enough, well, I would read aloud to her.
She couldn't read much of the time.
I would read, I used to read Hannah Jane's to her, and now I was reading that.
I'll date Barrett.
Why not?
Under the circumstances.
Yeah.
But I also read her my poems.
And when she felt well enough, she loved it.
It was the old life, you know, that we were working together.
And was this therapeutic for you?
Did you see this?
To write, absolutely, yes.
It was all during her illness, and it has been afterwards.
But it was helpful to her.
If she couldn't write, at least somebody was writing.
And she gave me advice.
We only knew she would die for the last 11 days.
On April 4, 1995, her blood counts were better.
She was recovering.
She was terribly sick.
On April 11, the leukemia had returned, and she was going to die.
And we went home.
And the first thing we did after that day, the next morning, was to work on her postures for the one I've been speaking of otherwise.
And the next, we worked a couple of hours, and the next day we worked an hour, and we finished it.
That is, we didn't make any revisions in Poland.
It was a matter of order and organizing, and what was in and what was out, and so on.
And we wrote her obituary together.
Really?
Yeah.
We planned the funeral.
When we finished the obituary, she said, it was fun to work together.
She wasn't just talking about obituary.
And so I thought, okay, it's fun.
I was at another point.
And I think she'd heard it before, but I read it aloud to her.
And she gave me a critical note.
But I could see that she was straining terribly to talk and to think, and so I didn't do any more.
But, I mean, I wrote that poem, and because she had just said it was fun to work with.
So we did.
So this is about this book.
We worked together on this book.
He saw it and read it from time to time, and so on.
Not the book as in existence, but parts of it.
And, of course, the old life itself is very episodic, so I showed it to her called my poem.
And she couldn't read at the end anyway, but I would read her some things.
Especially, I made sure I read all the things that included her, and some other things that were close to her.
I read it without, you know, the final poem.
I was just going to ask you if you'd read it back.
That's a poem written out of illness, not out of death.
Not especially hopeful, but it's in P.W., you know, the dumb review said it was about her death.
It was about how it was to live with this disease for 15 months.
Well, I probably began it about six months into the disease.
And I'd never written a poem before that was sort of asymptactical and unpunctuated.
I think the circumstances demanded it, though, actually.
Yeah, I think it came.
This poem came out of thoughts.
Poems don't come out of thoughts.
The year was without seasons, without compartments, without divisions.
And then I thought without punctuation, and that, of course, brought me to the point where I picked up a piece of paper.
I read it to her several times at different points in its career.
And that one probably went.
80, 90 times or something like that.
80 or 90.
So something like that.
I don't think that one went over 100.
I mean, once I had the idea, it was just a matter of getting the words right in the right order.
I mean, the forms would have played itself out of it.
It could have gone on forever.
It could have been shorter.
Curious.
I read that on Terry Gross, excerpting from it.
But every part of it, with minor exception, mirrors every other part.
You just want to get as much of the world as you can get in without going too far and reading these things.
But I read it to her.
And she called me Perkins.
Told you what?
Perkins.
And she said, Perkins, you've got it.
That's it.
You've got it.
She wasn't meaning at that point, you've got a terrific poem.
She meant, you've got, that's realism.
That's what it's like.
It was very much our disease.
My cancers earlier were always our cancers.
And this was our leukemia.
We were very close.
We had a 23-year marriage without children.
I had children by an earlier marriage.
But we were 20 years in the same house, two of us, all day, following the same ambition toward poetry.
We didn't chatter a whole lot.
We were both kind of, it was kind of a double solitude.
And we got together to eat and to make love, and in the evening we'd chat a little bit, reading opposite each other.
But it was intensely close.
So when there were words, they mattered?
Well, yeah, we didn't, we didn't, we didn't have much small talk.
Cain didn't have much time.
We had some, you know.
We talk about the neighbors and the weather, but why not?
You say here that you went out to dinner, uh, this, I was at the 20, out of the 24 SPF.
There were those who didn't give it five weeks or something.
Yeah, right, yeah.
So much for the Jews.
Well, we were, you know, we were 19 years old.
I was 10 years older than my wife.
And it made no difference at all.
Except that, of course, the problem was that she was going to be a widow for trying five years.
Isn't that something?
Who can do that?
Well, I had these dances, you know.
Oh, I mean, it's... The dances weren't very good after the second one.
And so far, I'm doing okay.
Well, I mean, you got these things, but... I'm trying.
You know, we haven't even talked about... I mean, you've done so much.
I mean, children's books.
I'm trying the children's books, too.
I want to do a book about libraries through history for kids.
Is that a nice idea?
yeah well i'm going okay we're about to get into that
Do you see the work as a corpus, as something that, when it's time, when there will be no more work from you?
Well, not exactly.
There are textbooks that you do.
There's a textbook for freshman English called Writing Well, which would fit in in the, oh, Berber manual.
The best part of that book is just about words one at a time, which is, of course, my material, whatever the hell I'm doing, and my obsession.
But then there would be... Maybe everything would fit together in one way or another.
Certainly the children's books and the poetry would fit together in many ways.
They're written with an equal economy.
And then the subject matter of a lot of the...
poems, children's books, short stories, whatever, as a continuity and an overlap.
So I suppose so.
I don't think of myself this way.
You know, you don't sort of plan what you'll do so that it'll be consistent with what you have done or anything.
It just comes out of your character and your history.
And your reading, too.
My reading habits changed a lot about 15 years ago.
I found history.
I found history, but I finally did them.
And then read all of Gibbon's sources and all the Greeks, and then began to read the... Did you read all of Gibbon's sources?
Oh, no.
They're not all in print, but... No, but that's, see, very early.
I read a lot of Gibbon's sources.
One of my chapters in my book, I was talking about the migration of books to North America, you know, and then, was it, which president was it who said, if we had a library that would just have Gibbon's, the books that Gibbon... Yeah.
use, we have a very good library.
And I've often wanted to go and actually look at the... No, you know, but I think that I've probably read five of these sorts.
Yeah, but nevertheless, it's an awesome... I'm really interested, by the way, in what people, for my next book, what people, what writers and artists read
how it does find its way into the end.
I read some contemporary novels.
I reread Henry James.
Jane and I read a lot of things.
You've mentioned James five times so far.
Jane and I read him almost entirely.
But we actually read The Ambassadors from beginning to end twice.
And I read Ulysses a lot.
You know, it's one of my favorite books ever.
My piece on it?
My assassination was history.
has come into my children's book.
And sometimes, you know, you have to sort of have this notion you have before looking at it to see.
But there's, I just have a book, a children's book called When Willard Met Babe Ruth.
It's absolutely full of social history of the teens, twenties, and thirties.
Do you reflect what you're reading now or what you read?
Well, that's what I've read over that.
It reflects a historical attitude toward character.
Yeah, because as you've said in the past, you know, you have no idea where this stuff comes from, I mean, in terms of how far back it's... Yes, and you have no idea what might turn out to be useful.
When you're acquiring something, it'll turn it up somewhere 20 years ago or 50 years ago.
Well, in the Moyers interview, you were talking about the apples on them.
He said, geez, that's it.
It's amazing.
Something like that happened to me very recently when I realized the source of something.
I can't remember what it was.
There's no anecdotes.
But that'll happen.
Poets revisit their old work more than novelists do, because they're always reading aloud.
So I will read old things, and at least you shouldn't know about it.
I've got to tell you a story.
my A.S.
Fyatt piece just this week.
Maybe I'll even ask you this question.
I asked her, who are you writing for when you're writing these huge books?
And she said, well, that's interesting.
She said, I'd like to think I'm writing for Henry James.
I loved that.
I used the quote.
I ended my piece with that quote.
She said, I think he'd understand what I'm trying to do.
Now, that's a great, wonderful quote.
And who are you writing for?
I mean, I may as well ask you the question.
It is an interesting question.
Yeah.
Sometimes, you know, people ask me in another way, a naïver way, which is, you know, when you are writing a poem, whom do you imagine as your audience?
Well, I don't imagine my audience as your audience.
But one thing I wanted to say that I think is really important is that I meet people who write poems, and they really are writing for themselves.
And people will even say, oh, I can't change that because that's the way I felt when I first put it down, you know.
And that is just being true to your own damn ego, you know.
I want to write a beautiful thing that will last forever.
I'm not telling you that I believe I will.
But that's what I want.
That's the goal.
Sure.
And a beautiful thing that will last forever is directed outward.
It comes from you, but it goes elsewhere.
There is...
amused.
That's probably just an evasive answer.
But there is the possibility of getting through to somebody else the way the author, the old Gamache, gets through to me, or George Herbert, or Bishop King.
That's a beautiful answer, and I'll use that in my new book, by the way.
I'll tell you why.
The title of my new book is Life Beyond Life, and it's from Milton in Arioppa Jericho, I guess.
Well, what is a book that gives you, you know, the book's precious life, the
life beyond life.
And that's what the best writing is, isn't it?
I guess.
I want to write for Henry James, like A.S.
Byatt, if you will.
And in the sense that he is writing for me, he is addressing me.
His self and character and knowledge is coming directly to me from his page.
So that's my model.
And therefore I want to do that.
Not for anybody.
Wonderful quote.
Don't...
Forgive me if I seem to be going too far afield.
We are in Cambridge surrounded by all these computer companies and all this talk about books of the future.
I'm going to get into that in my next book.
I'm going to interview George Steiner.
Oh, yeah.
He really writes.
He says, I go back to the Bible.
I mean, not for religious purposes, but for religious lighting and how resident our books through generations.
I don't know if this is a question or not, but I am really wondering if you have any thoughts about books, between hardcovers, and does it bother you that all this talk about books being on computer screens?
I don't have a computer.
But books being published, I imagine.
A lot of people call me, you know, for quotes for C.B.
Robbins and so on, and they're going to really do Robert Frost so that you can, you know, I don't know,
plunge on the word birch and have to see a picture of the birches and so on.
It's the confusion of literature and information, essentially.
That confusion.
And it's a basic confusion of our age, the confusion of everything with information.
And the experience of reading a poem, hearing it, reading it on the page, I suppose reading it off the screen, I don't know why, is not the experience of information, but the experience of
Reading an embodiment that bodies itself in your body and changes you, returns you, it's not reducible, it's not translatable.
The notion of information has a notion of equivalence, that a paraphrase or a translation is the same thing as the original.
It has that, I mean, no one would actually defend that saying a translation is the same as the original, but they act as it.
They feel that way increasingly.
All sorts of people who want to know better,
The poem is itself and nothing else but the poem, and the poem is its total impingement upon you.
And the more you can read it and the more deeply you can read into it, the more it impinges on you and comes inside you.
And it is by means of its language and its cadences and its vowels and the, oh, originality and tellingness of its images, or we could go on listing forever.
But it is not one of those things.
It's not reducible to those things.
It's the whole thing.
It's like looking at an abstract painting.
I say that.
It should be like looking at a portrait.
But when we look at a portrait, the first thing we see is a person and a character.
And then maybe later if we look at it, we see brushstrokes and the rhyming of colors and the distance of colors and so on.
And the point is all those things.
It is usually also a portrait.
with people, as it were, for a story.
But, uh, not always.
But, uh, if we do not, uh, take in the brushstrokes, the vowels, and so on, we are not reading a poem.
We're, we're looking for a story we can repeat.
I just want to, uh, I wanted to go see it.
It was a brand new library in New York, from New York Public Library, the Sybil, S-I-B-L Library.
Hundred million dollars.
They were on the 34th and, uh, right near the Morgan Library.
And there are some books, but they're really decorations.
This library is strictly computer terminals and docs.
And I've just learned that there's a brand new college that the California system was just built in Monterey, California, that was built without a library.
Can I do it?
Of course, it's sciences and... I feel about books the way you feel about books.
I'm writing about this.
Yeah, but I want to write about this.
I mean, can you imagine across school,
The head librarian, I got this quote, I'm going to confront the guy with this, of Stanford University that said, quote, the future, if you can't plug it in, I'm not interested in it.
That record is happening soon.
Stanford, the Harvard of the West, allegedly.
You don't have a library, you have an information resource center.
And information, as you so eloquently pointed out, is data, which computers do a very good job of, but data and information,
And that wisdom, then, that knowledge, which we don't read in a coherent... We don't reduce money to information, nor... Do you think in imagery?
Oh, sure.
Yeah, yeah.
I think in pictures and stories a lot.
And language.
But I think in dialogue a great deal, too.
Immensely.
But it's dramatic and active.
And there is something in me, I think, when while I wake, that is always dreaming.
And like nightly, and sometimes that bubbles up to the surface, too, with sometimes nightmarish action in a picture of color, which has something to tell me.
Do you wake up in the morning at all with solutions to problems?
Sometimes in problems in poems.
That's what I mean, basically.
I've worked by getting up usually about five and reading a paper with coffee and breakfast to wake up, and then getting to the desk is the first thing I do.
It's the reason I want to wake up now to change it.
And now I go and fiddle with poems about that.
But my...
I feel clearest, clearest, and also most critical of myself early in the morning, as to that.
And I already, you know, I'll begin a poem or revise a poem any time.
It strikes me any time of day and night, but the regular daily work is a big poem.
I can't follow tapes at night.
Then I can write prose later in the day.
I remember when Elon Musk's letters and his journal came out, and I forget which one, but the letters were very nicely done, and the journal was a mess, and they figured, well, he did one in the morning when he was sober, and clear-headed him to do the other at night when he was drunk, you know?
That means you could see it throughout the whole body of
I forget what it was, the Journal of the Letters, which was written quite a few years ago.
We only talked about baseball or going back to the home in New Hampshire.
I mean, you talk about, I mean, was this a place to go back to, or was it, I mean, tell me about this.
When I was growing up in the suburbs of Connecticut, I hated it, and I longed to get to New Hampshire in the summer, the same place where I live now, where I'd be hanging with my grandfather.
I mean, the same home.
Literally, yeah.
I lived where my grandmother was born as well as my mother.
1803, I read some places how the house was built.
But the house was built then.
My family moved in 1865.
It was still 130 years.
Continuous since then.
But I loved my grandfather and grandmother and the old people.
I didn't really like kids very much.
And I thought, you know, from the age of 12 or 13 or something, well, I'll be the writer and I'll live up here.
not in this house, because that would involve killing off my grandparents.
I didn't want to think that, but that's where I wanted to live.
And I've been, you know, various childhood sorts of how I've made my living, which is mostly about writing novels or something.
And then when I was, say, college age, I knew better.
And I began to think of teaching for a living while I wrote poetry, but maybe being able to get back to New Hampshire
lived there some and so on.
And in my first marriage, my wife did not want to live in the country, did not want to live in New Hampshire.
And I didn't think I ever could, so I didn't, that wasn't any quarrel between us.
But I kind of gave up on it.
And then there was divorce and five years.
I was single for five years, and I married Jane.
Same thing from Ann Arbor, but it was the outskirts, and she grew up opposite a working farm.
And she adored New England, which she'd hardly seen, and she loved the farm itself, which I took to after we were married.
And we, I expected to keep on teaching in Ann Arbor, but we were looking, maybe living in a farm outside Ann Arbor.
And then one day James said, it was ridiculous to buy a farm here when it was New Hampshire.
Well, that made no logical sense, since I couldn't move to my classes.
But it began us thinking about getting this place.
uh, 94, 95, turning senile.
She had to leave the place in order to support her in the old folks' home.
They were going to take a mortgage on the farm.
We had it, uh, surveyed first time since 1865.
Got a price on it, and I found out that I could, uh, give a, give them a lump sum now, like a mortgage, and it would turn into down payment labor, and move her on the way.
In the 1970s, who was them?
Are these your family members?
Yes, right.
My mother and her two sisters and two of the three did not have enough money to save us for realhood.
So having a little money from the farm, I mean, I bought it.
I didn't inherit it.
Having a little money from the sale of the farm was essential.
And I had written a textbook which was called Writing Well, which was the first thing I had.
I never did that make any money.
Well, you know.
Profile.
Pardon?
What year was it?
Late eight?
Maybe 1972.
You know, I'd sold a profile to the New Yorker for 40 rand.
40 rand?
Yeah.
Way back.
That's pretty good.
It was a 40,000-word profile of Henry Moore.
That's fair.
And then...
We decided to take a year's leave without pay and to camp in the house and go see my grandmother in the old folks home.
But when we arrived with our U-Haul with television set and a couple of things, my grandmother took her turn for the worse, and I sat holding her hand while she died.
And it's as if, and possibly, that she was able to let go because the house was very important to her and giving the family was.
I was there to take over.
Well, we planned to spend just a year, but after two months, Jane said, I'll chain myself in the root cellar.
I won't go back.
You know, I felt the same way.
We wanted to stay there, but I didn't know how the hell I was going to make a living.
beginning to make some money, but I didn't know how it would next year.
You know about freelancing.
I know.
A good week is only good this week.
Yeah.
And, you know, I've been all these years on the TED, you know, with medical insurance and everything, all that stuff.
It was scary.
I know.
But the passion to stay there and to write all the time.
The place to live was the first thing.
But it's been my dream since I was a kid.
to make a living as a freelance writer.
I was sensible enough to give up on it or forget about it from time to time, but I really wanted it always.
And so I quit my job, we stayed there, and I began to do, you know, four books a year, and 40 periodical pieces, and children's books.
And stuff is job work to you, right?
I managed mostly to write about things I wanted to know about, or had fun writing about.
I mean, there were a lot of things.
Baseball was one of them.
And New Hampshire was another one of them.
And poetry was another one.
We didn't get much money for writing about poetry, but a little.
And poetry readings.
And I began to put it together from, you know, in a given year there might be 250 different sources of income.
I'd judge a contest.
I got a hundred bucks here and a thousand bucks there, and so on.
My children's book, Oxcart Man, which came out about six years after he moved there, really probably was the thing that relieved me of anxiety.
I didn't have a lot of anxiety.
Every few months, I'd get worried about how I was going to take college.
Who published his own book?
All sorts of people.
Viking published Oxcart Man.
Parker Brace has done a whole bunch of style.
And I've continued to do them.
It was a long time when I didn't, but seven years, almost eight years ago, I started to have grandchildren, and I said, Sam, I'd rather done five or six years.
But, you know, I made actually a very good living.
I made a better living than I would have as a professor.
Children's books are almost like annuities, because they stay in print forever.
If they're good, yeah.
They take off, yeah.
My grandchildren would be getting income from outside.
Yeah, and is that the one that went to Calveter?
Yeah.
That's a big day.
Well, that's big day.
But others have done pretty well.
Well, I review children's books.
I review children's, yeah, that's one of the things I do.
We do special children's books and cookbooks.
Well, by the way, what's your time constraint?
Well, I'm getting a little tired.
How are you?
I'm fine.
We can wrap it up very quickly.
I don't like to go over an hour either.
It's very repetitive after a while.
How about the farm?
How large is the farm, acre-wise?
152 acres.
Is it a working farm still?
No, no.
It wouldn't be in any case.
It's not just that I don't want to do farm work.
That kind of farm is not possible.
Oh, you could turn it into an orchard or a strawberry.
Yeah, but that's what it was.
No, the land isn't very good.
It was a multi-farm.
My grandpa had, you know, eight hoes peens, 50 sheep, 200 chickens.
And he worked all day, every day, all year, and he never complained.
He liked it.
Are you hopeful that the farm stays in the family?
I would love it if it would, and we're working on it.
And I didn't ask you about baseball, but I don't know if that's terrible.
You told me some of the things that you're working on.
And I think it's pretty obvious that your own sense of mortality works into everything that you write.
But I was a kid.
That's the kicker, by the way.
I'm always looking for the last sentence, you see.
And that's the one.
It always has.
What's your zinger at the beginning?
Well, this one I'll have to work on.
Okay.
Would you describe my book for me, please?
All that's theirs and that's signed.
And they've gotten behind it 100%.
I'm giving talks.
I'm giving four talks this month.
I mean, it doesn't stop.
It gets smaller and smaller and smaller.
And I just told them, look, these people paid 20 bucks to get into a bookstore to buy books.
You think you're not going to buy this book?
They're going to go crazy over this book.
I mean, you've got that as a given.
But Alan called me.
My agent said, I want to try Alan Peacock.
And I didn't.
I said, try Alan Peacock.
He waited.
He called.
The day before Thanksgiving at 93, he called me.
He said, hey, Alan, how you doing?
He said, I want to tweet out of the guy.
He's a lovely one.
He said, yeah.
I want to be in the family, have a nice Thanksgiving tomorrow, and I'm going to buy your book."
He said, it's going to take a while.
I've got people, even he had to convince people at home.
It's going to take a while.
He's just on the Pulitzer with Bart Butler.
He did the Shimon Peres book.
His stock was writing very high.
It's going to take me a while, but trust me, we're going to buy it.
He said, having said that now,
I'm going to buy it.
Nothing you say now will change my mind.
He said, what's wrong with the book?
Why didn't it random house tell it?
I said, Alan, did I read it?
It's wonderful.
What's wrong with it?
Tell me.
I said, I'm going to try this idea.
I don't know why.
The only thing they would ever tell me, I'd press the box on the phone.
You don't want to have it.
I'm sorry to pour you without it.
This is probably a nightmare.
I said, what's wrong with my book?
You know, first, it's like being told somebody died of this.
I was to be called in one morning, and I said, I'm not publishing your book.
And he was not nice.
He wasn't sympathetic.
I got a feeling he was enjoying this, you know?
And I said, well, what the hell is wrong with my book?
Tell me what's wrong with it.
I'll tell you what's wrong.
He said, part one, you end in the great part of the book is history, and the second part is contemporary.
He says, I'll tell you what's wrong.
He says, part one ends in the Great Depression, and it starts part two in the 1980s.
I said, yeah, that's true.
There's a high reading to that.
I did want to kind of get straight into the journalism.
He said, you could have given me a transitional paragraph.
I said, right hand.
I said, transitional paragraph?
I said, good point.
I'll fax one within the hour.
What's next?
What next do you need?
And he said, well, your Blumbridge chapter, the bookseed.
The guy that stole the $20 million worth of books, I went to his trial, and
wonderful, wonderful stuff.
He said, you call him Steven.
He said, you should be calling him Blumberg.
I mean, we're talking really heavy stuff here.
I said, yeah, good point.
I'll do a search for all the Stevens in the computer.
I'll change it.
What else?
Nothing else.
I called my agent.
He said his everlasting credit will stop.
He said, he called Bill Fox instantly, and he said, fine.
He said, all right, I'm sending a messenger over there right now to make a manuscript.
And he said, no, no, I'll send it over.
No, no, no, no.
He said, right now.
Right now.
He said, you're not going to tamper with it.
I want it.
He said, there'll be a messenger there in 10 minutes.
Have it ready.
And so I've got this manuscript, which is absolutely line edited.
All these little marginal comments.
Nick, you go, we should move this over here.
We're going to move this here.
No problem with the book.
Straight through to the last page.
It is absolutely minor that it's prepared for publication, and it's essentially a young book that is published.
And they never invoked this acceptability clause, it would have been ridiculous.
So I thought, I couldn't keep you there, because it's altered.
I mean, I didn't know how to have a Joan Collins suit.
I mean, you're only trying to cover what you lost, I guess, right there.
Grim story.
How many go to work?
I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
Without inspiration.
I'm sorry.
Let's get my ass in here.
The good news is it never would have been done as well as it was by Hope.
I don't think the book was great.
And it was the second best-selling book at Hope last year.
Congratulations.
I'm sorry to bore you with that story, but it's nice, and we're going to do another book about books, and that'll be there.
All right, sir.
Glad to see you, Nick.
Thanks.
Bye-bye.
I'm sorry.
I hope you write it up.
Keep notes, and you may not write it up this year, but write it up.
At some point.
When I get orphaned like that, the temptation was to go tell the New York Times.
I write for them.
I publishes weekly, but I felt you're going to be a pariah.
Your responsibility is to the book, to sell the book and get the book published.
I still haven't told the story publicly yet.
There's nothing to be gained from it.
There's a guy in my book, a chef, you'll like this.
Chef Louie lost everything in World War II and he came here to this country as a DP.
He's a displaced person and he became this guy in Chicago, Louis Zafmari.
He owned a bakery restaurant in Chicago and he's now given hundreds of thousands of books and major collections all over the country.
I said, well, how do you feel losing those books?
You know, he said, God put the eyes, he said, there's an old Hungarian saying, he said, if God wanted you to look backward, he could put the eyes in the back of your head.
He said, God put the eyes in the front so we look forward.
And he said, I don't look back at what I lost.
He said, I look like what I'm capable of doing, which is a wonderful attitude.
All right.
Inspirational.
Yeah.